[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am joined
today by daniel goldman who wrote an
extraordinary book that i am very
excited he's written a whole host of
books in fact that i'm excited to talk
about
but emotional intelligence being one of
the ones that we'll probably spend a lot
of time on today
and why it may be more important than iq
daniel welcome to the show
thank you tom pleasure to be here
dude this topic is something that i
think a lot about as somebody who grew
up not thinking of themselves as being
particularly iq smart um this was one of
those first things that gave me some
hope that there might be something that
you know i'm that i could find my own
sort of path to success
and
talk us through sort of just like a real
brief introduction to what uh emotional
intelligence is and and i think focusing
on the four parts um would be a good
place to start
so emotional intelligence is just a
different way of being smart as you
pointed out it's being intelligent about
emotions so there are four parts
self-awareness knowing what you're
feeling why you feel it how it affects
what you do
managing yourself using that awareness
to
keep your disruptive emotions in check
and marshall your good feelings your
positive
your energy
and then tuning into other people
empathy knowing how they feel and then
putting that all together to have
effective relationships so those are the
four parts self-awareness
self-management empathy and social skill
and
frankly
there are a lot of very high iq people
who are not very good in this domain
and also i've got lots of different
kinds of data that show
that as you go on in life and in your
personal life and even in an
organization as you go up the ladder
emotional intelligence skills matter far
more for success
than your cognitive abilities for
example take even in a tech industry
think about this
you may be a software engineer working
with other software engineers that's
there's no emotional intelligence there
particularly your programming but
let's say you become head of a team or
head of a division
or a vice president or c-level executive
now you're managing people you're not
writing code
you're
handling people
who write code so you don't need to you
don't need that technical skill you need
people skills
so when we actually daniel um one thing
really fast your mic is uh bumping on
your shirt or something so if we can
that would be very simple of the
solution okay awesome yeah do you want
to start over no no no we're absolutely
fine um so when i think about emotional
intelligence or even iq i the question i
always want to know is how malleable is
this stuff you know is this something
that we can get better at or is it a
trait that's locked in yeah so here's
the good news it's learned and learnable
but it doesn't
matter where you are now you can get
better and there's a methodology for
that and also this is why i'm a big
proponent of teaching this to kids in
school
because there's a developmental window
the brain
its emotional social circuits don't
become anatomically mature till the
mid-20s
so there's a chance to get it right in
the first place it's not too late in
adulthood but you may have to unlearn
some habits
and then relearn new ones so it's a
little harder
what are some of the things that you
because i know that you've actually
worked really hard to get this turned
into curriculum in schools i assume you
focus k through 12.
what does training emotional
intelligence look like like what are the
muscles that we have to strengthen
well
first of all the best programs cover the
whole range self-awareness
self-management empathy getting along
with other kids
go into some details like one thing so
when i think about self-awareness
um
i
i think about it in terms of trying to
not only recognize that you're feeling
something but then put an interpretation
to that feeling
is that how you approach it in the
curriculum that you teach and if so how
do you walk kids through that yeah so uh
i don't teach the curriculum but i'm a
proponent of the curriculum
and for example with a little kid
you might start every day with the
feeling circle this happens in a lot of
schools where kids say how they feel
right now and why
is it called a feeling circle you're
they're just because they're sitting in
the kids sit in a circle sit in a circle
and the teacher has them go around and
say well how do you feel why do you feel
that way
it's just that but that is the beginning
of self-awareness and you might do it
five and six-year-olds
here's let me tell you a story
five-year-old kid who's in one of these
classes
it's a snowy day i don't know where you
live tom but you have to imagine a snowy
day
and the kid says i want to go out and
play mom and mom says fine but you have
to put your snow suit on and he has a
tantrum no way i'm not going to put on
my snowsuit he's pounding the floor and
yelling no no no then all of a sudden
he stands up goes to his room
comes back with his snow suit on and
starts to go out his mom says hey what
just happened he says
oh
my guard dog got upset so i had my wise
al talk to it so what is that that is
neuroscience for a five-year-old it's
taught in these courses he's talking
about his prefrontal cortex the brain's
executive center that's the wise owl the
amygdala and the the the emotional
circuitry and the midbrain that get you
so upset that's his guard dog and he has
learned how to manage his emotions his
disruptive emotions his anger or
whatever
with his prefrontal cortex and that is
one of the circuits you want to
strengthen
as a child ages it's technically it's
called cognitive control it's the
ability to see
and realize oh i'm getting upset
oh that's anger
i'm upset because of this
and talk yourself through it or or find
a way to calm down physiologically
and change your state before you respond
before you wreck we get in trouble in
life today in our private life and at
work
when we have what you have to call an
amygdala hijack where all of a sudden
that
radar for threat thinks oh my gosh
there's an emergency and it takes over
the prefrontal cortex
and we are really pissed off or really
scared and we maybe send an email or say
something to someone or do something
that we regret later that's the hallmark
of the hijack
and are you familiar with um lisa
do you know lisa feldman barrett by any
chance in her work
i know who she is but i don't know her
work that well
i think you guys would be in very close
to lockstep you guys cover a lot of the
same ground she so when you were talking
about the guard dog and the wise owl
right um there's a concept that she
talks about where part of as people
begin to develop an awareness of their
body it's having a concept that you can
put that into and i've heard you both
talk about this idea of the brain is
sort of always trying to predict trying
to guess at why i feel this way and put
it into a box right and by it seems like
part of what you're doing is giving kids
more boxes or giving them names ways to
conceptualize this stuff
that helps them is that part of the
strategy that's part of cognitive
control and she and i are both
working from the original underlying
neuroscience of joseph ledoux
at new york university she's at
northeastern i think or at boston
but at any rate he's done the
foundational work on this very important
interaction between the prefrontal
cortex and the emotional centers can you
get into that a bit
yeah so the emotional centers uh
have as a trigger the amygdala the amiga
is constantly scanning
our world our reality as we go through
it to see is there a threat and this of
course an evolution was no doubt highly
important for survival russell in the
bushes run away it's going to eat me if
i don't you have to have a very quick
response the problem is that in
civilization today we have the same
biological response and the same wiring
of the central nervous system
where
this one part of the brain can declare
an emergency and take over the thinking
brain the prefrontal cortex and the
importance
and make it do what it thinks we need to
to survive
and very very often that just doesn't
work in
modern day life because it might be
oh i'm being treated unfairly and then
uh you know the amygdala says oh
how unfair i'm gonna be you know i'm
gonna slug this guy the amygdala thinks
like a child i think i've referred to
that as symbolic threat
it's a symbolic threat not a not a
physical threat
yeah so i'm being treated unfair not
being listened to someone's taking
credit for my work
these are all symbolic threats the
biological response is very powerful
and
if you're lucky
the impulse to slug the guy goes to your
brain and information from other parts
of the brain can come in like oh that's
your boss
so you're not going to slug him you're
going to do something you're going to
smile and change the subject so
emotional intelligence is the smooth
integration
of the emotional centers and the
prefrontal uh the thinking part of the
brain executive part of the brain
so all right so that takes us into the
beginnings of self-awareness do when
you're talking to kids
um about that connection in the body um
do you go into that like teaching them
how to sort of assess like oh i'm
getting flushed or i'm feeling anxious
or
you know do you give them sort of the
signs of the guard dog to look out for
yeah so i have to say there's more than
100 different curricula and social
emotional learning which is what this
called
and so they all do it differently but
generally what you want to do
is to
help the child learn
that when my stomach feels this way
or
you know when i start to get a little
jittery it's an early sign
of maybe a hijack coming
whatever language you use and these
programs use different language but you
want children to be able to recognize
what's going on in them
so that they can take control it's a way
of giving them
actually more agency more ability to
manage their own life
and uh you can do that in different ways
at different levels of maturity so you
might do it one way for the
five-year-old the guard dog and the wise
owl you might do it very differently for
10 year olds or 15 year old because they
can comprehend at higher and higher
levels
so what about for people as they get
older you know somebody that's watching
this now they're 35 whatever their long
past that sort of age where the brain is
has baked itself in
there is hope for them for sure brain
plasticity obviously continues until the
day you die um but you talked about
people might have to unlearn some of
that
what does that process look like well
let's say you have you're quick to anger
but you wish you didn't yell at your
kids so much or your wife so much or
whoever so much
so the first step in changing that habit
is mindfulness
paying attention to what's going on in
you
and starting as with the kids starting
to recognize the early warning signs
that you're about to lose it
because then you can intervene you have
a window of opportunity
pardon me are those universal
the window the signs the early warning
signs oh i think they vary from person
to person depending on what the habit is
you want to change
and then the
once you recognize oh i'm heading down
that path which is the direction you
don't want to go
what can i do that's different
well one thing that we find in
neurosciences tells us this work from
ucla
if you can name the feeling of getting
angry it already shifts energy from the
circuitry for anger to the verbal cortex
which is naming the anger so that starts
that starts to
weaken the path then
ideally you want to have something else
you can do take a deep breath
count to ten
pause however you're going to do it
think about what's effective in the
situation and then respond
that's that's what i was calling
cognitive control
and
the best programs for kids teach
cognitive control
and it's never too late to
increase your cognitive control
so that's basically interested in how
adults really beef this up so you've
written pretty extensively in fact this
even before i knew you were the one
behind the book emotional intelligence i
came across the notion of altered traits
and meditation and how impactful that
can be sure um and you started this off
with mindfulness one when did you start
meditating and i assumed i started a
long time ago when i was in college
and what what got you into that i was
really uptight and anxious and it
relaxed me
but how'd you even find that like i'm
guessing this is are we talking about
the 70s
uh it was a lot it was a long time ago
however i was at berkeley at the time
was very easy to find in the bay area
it was probably very hard to find in
middle america
uh it was probably only in certain you
know urban centers university towns at
that time
now it's everywhere you know businesses
are teaching mindfulness as as such an
early adopter though i'm really curious
so it did it just seemed self-evident to
you that this could be useful were you
already studying psychology and so it
seemed like anything that
attached your physiology could be
interesting the psychology of the day
paid no attention to meditation
i paid no attention to altered states or
altered traits
and in fact i found that out because i i
went on to graduate school in clinical
psychology
and spent two years in india when i came
back to harvard to my program which was
very psychoanalytic at the time and said
i wanted i
met a lot of people in india who seemed
really cooled out and they all seem to
be meditators and i think there's
something there's a there there and i
like to do my research my dissertation
research on it and they thought that was
the stupidest idea they'd ever heard
that was the kind of reception so that
was the atmosphere at the time so it
took it was a little bit of a risk back
in those days to be so interested in
meditation but it's even weirder so what
what did you study in undergrad
uh
behavioral science generally okay so
you're at berkeley you're studying
behavioral science you yourself are
feeling sort of stressed out you come
across a monk one day like how does
how what was your first introduction oh
no um
when i was 13 my sister gave me a book
called zen flesh zen bones
this planted a seed
it was about zen satori
i thought what's the story
satori is a momentary enlightenment
experience
like aha i got it you may not keep it
but you got it then so you can remember
that it's like a psychedelic chip oh i
got it and then the
chemical that leaves your body and you
lose it
but at least you had it for a while
so anyway that was inspiring i got very
interested in eastern schools of thought
all of which said
there's this other way of being
which transcends you know
ordinary life i was very intrigued by
that
and
i thought i would try meditation and as
i said my immediate motivation was i was
pretty anxious
and i found it actually worked for me
cooled me out
and now what kind of meditation were you
doing in the beginning was it um did you
learn to breathe from your diaphragm no
no it's tm
okay i don't you know i hear about tm
all the time and i actually think i
asked somebody about this talk about a
momentary enlightenment yeah i've since
again forgotten tm is where you repeat a
word or a sound over and over to sort of
calm down and at the time i paid a lot
of money for that mantra
and then when i went to india i found my
mantra listed
among other mantras in the appendix of a
book that was published in calcutta i
thought oh man
but then once i was in india i started i
had an opportunity to learn mindfulness
how old were you when you went to india
i must have been 23 24.
okay so you encounter meditation i'm
guessing sort of late teens early 20s
you're doing tm you're repeating a
phrase that you've paid a fair amount of
money for
but you're finding that it lowers your
anxiety
oh yeah it works every kind of
meditation seems to do that so the book
you mentioned altered traits which
reviews
uh the meditation research in good
journals
shows that no matter what meditation
you're going to do if you do it
regularly it does two things it calms
you it makes you less triggered less
often
and when you're triggered you're not
triggered so intensely and you recover
more quickly that's the calm
and it also focuses you it's meditation
is a direct training
for the mind in paying attention because
every every meditation says
you do this thing
repeat the mantra
i have a certain stance toward your
experience that's mindfulness and if
your mind wanders off as it's going to
do and you notice it wandered bring it
back
that's like a rep in the gym with the
weight every time you lift the weight
the muscle gets that much stronger
and in meditation every time you bring
your mind back you're training your
neural circuitry to pay attention
so those are the two big main effects of
any kind of meditation by the way i
don't advocate any brand
i i
really believe that the best meditation
is the one you'll do
whatever one it is
and i don't care because because the key
is just the focus or
well
you know there's different levels of
benefit and i would say for most of us
just getting calmer and staying more
focused means we're going to make better
decisions
taking information better it helps with
our life we're going to yell less at the
kids whatever it is
and
why would that be true so as a meditator
i get it experience
yes it changed my life
ah what would you call it i call it just
breathe so
um i took it from box breathing as a
method but i found that the four equal
parts of the breath
were they left me actually almost short
of breath so what i do is i just sit
super comfortably and i breathe each
each part of the cycle to maximize the
pleasure so i inhale only as long as
inhaling feels good i hold on the inhale
only as long as it feels good i exhale
in a way that feels good and i hold the
exhale as long as it feels good and as
long as i like you said i'm bringing my
mind back to just focusing on my
breathing or a big thing for me is i
listen to natural sounds so it might be
waves crashing or it might be a
thunderstorm or rain
but that like when i'm aware of the
sounds
then like i have the chills right now
just thinking about it when i'm aware of
the sounds and i'm not sort of zoned off
but i'm actually there with that sound
and i'm just focused on my breathing i
get super calm and for me the hook was
diaphragm breathing
that it literally in a single breath it
changed my life forever i was in a
period where one my diet was such a mess
that i was i was just drinking so many
artificial drinks and was creating
anxiety plus i was in a very anxiety
provoking period of my life and so i was
like yo i have got to figure something
out came across a navy seal because i
always thought that meditation was too
sort of soft
and i in my life journey was about
toughening up and so anyway i'd shoot it
for a long time and this guy finally was
like tom stop being a dumb ass you got
to try this and so i did literally with
that first diaphragmatic breath i could
feel myself shifting into the
parasympathetic nervous system and i was
like oh my god how did i not do this for
so many years this is absolutely insane
and now i'm i'm a devotee to breath work
meditation cold exposure like anything
that i can do to i think like you're
saying largely stay focused increase
that
the ability to
bring myself back to focus but it's also
and you wrote about this in the books
and i'd be curious to hear your thoughts
on how they do this
how some meditators and you reference
specifically one swami i forget his name
but that can control his autonomic
nervous system which of course is a big
draw of people like um wim hof
and
that has been transformational for me
well
i have a lot of things to tell you tom
what is this i'm just uh i'm writing a
book now with spent llama
and i just finished a chapter on exactly
the kind of controlled breathing you're
doing that 444
which the navy seals used to calm down
and it has the research shows it has a
very
strong impact physiologically just as
you said it shifts you from the
sympathetic nervous system the
fight-or-flight the anxiety mode
to calm to the parasympathetic or
relaxation response
whatever you want and it does it very
powerfully if you stick with it and if
you do it regularly you can do it once
it might happen and you'll stay there
for a second or two if you do it dave do
you do it daily
i do yeah not seven days a week but five
pretty pretty regularly yeah so if you
do that it's like working out in the gym
you get better and better at it and your
musc your
brain and body get better at getting
into that state however you added
something which i want to point out
which was attention control you're also
working with your attention in that
every time your mind wanders off you
notice i hope or you try to notice and
bring it back
that's a good beginning
now as as i pointed out in the book
altered traits
there's many levels
to meditative
accomplishment
and they're people
who meditate like uh a thousand to ten
thousand hours
lifetime
and they get better benefits there's
dose response relationship and then
there are the yogis these are like
industrial strength meditators they
devote their whole life to it and my
co-author richie davidson who by the way
i've known since graduate school at
harvard he too was interested in
meditation he was told
well that would be a career-ending move
however he's now got a lab at university
of wisconsin which has a hundred people
he's wasn't currently it's so big now
yeah it's very big but the interesting
thing was he flew these yogis over one
by one
put him in brain scans and so and it
turned out at the upper level like the
olympic level of this
brains are different
physiology is different one of the
things as i mentioned the book which i
really am struck by
if you or i have great insight aha i got
it
our eeg wave shows a high intensity
gamma for about a half second
or if you
imagine biting into a peach and the
sound and the taste and
you know all of that all at once you get
a same gamma
these yogis
had that gamma
all the time in the resting eeg which
suggests that they are in
what we call an altar trait of
consciousness so
it's it's great to begin and we all will
get benefits but if you keep going it
seems to get better and better so at my
age and my point of life i'm feeling
like hey i better get going
you know i'm taking this seriously i'm
paying i'm putting a lot more time into
it that's interesting well tell me about
india so you go to india in your sort of
early midish 20s
were you just still at too driven a
period in your life to say i'm going to
set this aside and become the industrial
strength yogi
uh actually i was
really interested in hanging out with
people who were accomplished
yogis llamas and swamis
by the way the swami x that you
mentioned
he could control his autonomic nervous
system but he didn't know what he was
doing he was a little bit of a phony
actually really oh yeah oh i've heard
this guy mention so many times tell me
more
well when he said he was going to
increase his
heart rate he slowed it when he said he
was going to slow it he actually went
into tachycardia which is very dangerous
very funny i remember you saying that in
the book but um i didn't catch that you
were saying that this was basically bs
now what i heard is that he could he he
would claim to stop his heart but he was
more i think this way talking about
tachycardia he was speeding it up so
much
that it you basically couldn't
differentiate between beats no but he's
also sneaking off to the bathroom to
smoke cigarettes i mean the guy was like
not what he made up i i actually i got a
telegram from someone in india who knew
him before he came to america
who said don't have anything to do with
that guy he he abandoned his wife and
two kids he used to be the manager of a
shoe factory
so this guy was a you know this was the
problem americans are so naive we had no
discrimination
uh on who's a real who's the real mccoy
and who's a phony so
a lot of but do you find it interesting
that he could adjust his heart rate even
if it was in the wrong like let's say he
couldn't tell which way he was doing it
the fact that he could
change it is unique even if it you know
is a genetic fluke or something
well
uh i would be more impressed if he knew
what he was doing
now are there people now that that can
do it on purpose
um
i've never met any you mean stopped
their heart
ah stop the heart seems a bit dicey but
in terms of consciously slow it down or
consciously raise it
probably
i wouldn't be surprised
but you know
the research interest has moved on from
that that was very naive
we're like oh wow there's a guy who has
some autonomic control this was the day
of biofeedback you know when
you know you we thought you needed a
signal to slow your heart rate or speed
it up
and this guy said he could do it without
that so we're very
interested but you know now we're more
interested in what happens in the brain
partly we're interested because now we
have the technology that lets us look we
didn't have it then
we only had external measures so i go to
india
and
what i was interested in was actually
studying eastern
systems
as systems of psychology
and
because it seemed to me that
uh there were
psychological systems ways of working
with the mind that had that were
millennia old they're completely unknown
in the west
and you know i thought well okay i'll
bring some of these back and also
they're practical they have an
application and the application was
mainly through meditation not solely
and i i was very interested in bringing
meditation to the west in a sound way
not through selling some brand of
meditation
but in getting good research done on it
and you know i had two friends from
those days that have stayed in that
track one is richard davidson who really
is leading the neuroscience research on
this there is a guy named john
kabat-zinn
who has introduced mindfulness-based
stress reduction he was like the father
of mindfulness in america
uh he
his
kind his approach was developed in a
medical setting to help patients who
medicine could no longer help just help
them have a better quality of life and
now it's spread and all sectors but one
of the reasons it spread is because
there's very good research behind it
and i i'm still a believer for the west
it's important
our belief system to a great extent
hinges on the credibility of science
why do you think this matters like why
why does it matter to you so much to
bring
um
meditation here into the west i think
having read your book i know the
punchline but i'm curious to
hear well i think
meditation
is a kind of mind training and emotional
management
that people
people can benefit from immensely so i
think it's actually it's a kind thing to
bring it to
to the west
um
i think that's my motivation
and also it's interesting you know
emotional intelligence kind of does the
same thing
i was going to say like to me the things
that you're into from focus to um
altered traits meditation
um
emotional intelligence all feel like you
you need them all if you're going to
pull this off you talk in the book
emotional intelligence you talk a lot
about um one of the studies i i find
just beyond intriguing um looking at
couples and why they divorce and the
four horsemen
you know this notion that if there's
contempt in the relationship like you're
really going to be in trouble and then
the idea of being able to give people
the tools to unwind that stuff
um and how much of that is going to
start with what we've talked about
already the the awareness
being mindful recognizing body emotions
translating that into a concept that you
can sort of hold on to
um you even talk in the book about
taking a break like if you feel like
whoa we're escalating we're we're moving
towards an emotional hijack here um to
take a break so you can settle down um
where this really starts to get
interesting to me is
is how it plays out
in leadership and how when you look at
people that perform just at the top top
top of their game
it's no longer about iq because they all
have high
iq what what are those elements how do
we begin to get good at that
interpersonal stuff the notion of the
social brain like
talk to me about that
okay so the research
you're talking about the four horsemen
of the apocalypse comes from john
gottman
who studies couples
and he found that if a couple is having
a fight
basically those are two amygdala hijacks
think about it it's helpful to
separate for at least 20 minutes so you
can calm down then come back now let's
look at you know the workplace
everybody who's at a certain level of
management
has to have had an iq about a standard
deviation above the norm it's about 115.
it's what it takes to get an mba or a
masters in any subject
and that is what's called the threshold
competence
everybody needs it to get in the game
what's more interesting are the
distinguishing competencies once you're
in the game what makes one person so
successful while someone else is not so
successful and it turns out emotional
intelligence makes the difference how
you manage yourself and how you relate
to others
and the most
successful executives the most
successful leaders
get top performance out of people and
there's lots of research that shows us
people like them more
people are more loyal to the
organization they want to help other
people out there's a host of kind of a
halo effect from that that highly
emotionally intelligent leader
and it makes an organizat you know you
see it in profit and growth
so you know hard metrics soft skills
have hard consequence
and so
uh think about it what what
i don't know if you've worked for many
different people
but i asked people around the world what
are the qualities of the boss you love
the most
and what are the qualities of the boss
you hated the most and invariably
wherever i am it's emotional
intelligence that characterizes the boss
with love did i say that or do they have
different words that they used to
descend no no no i asked them i asked
them just give me one
uh
characteristic of the boss you love
right and then one of the boss you hate
and then i list it and all lo and behold
the list describes emotional
intelligence these are people that you
trust these are people that give you
psychological safety these are people
who are honest
you know on and on and on
and then psychological safety
as somebody who wants to be a good boss
i really want to know what these are so
psychological safety is
oh psychological safety is critical
for a relationship but what if you
okay there's three kinds of empathy top
one is cognitive empathy you know how
people think you know the language they
use you can be a good communicator
the second is uh emotional empathy this
has to do with the social brain which we
should come back to but brains create a
invisible
instantaneous unconscious brain-to-brain
link
and emotions pass back and forth so you
know what the other person's feeling
because you feel it too and then the
third kind of empathy is empathic
concern
this these of these is based in
different part of the brain empathic
concern
is based in a parent's love for a child
it's the mammalian caretaking circuitry
and it means
it's not just that i know how you think
and know how you feel i can manipulate
you with that but i actually care about
you
i i want what's good for you
that creates psychological safety so if
you can
actually feel that if you can
communicate it to people
and you do it verbally non-verbally you
might have a one-on-one conversation
with the person who works for you not
about their job but about the person
just getting to know them what do they
want from life from
you know from their career from this job
how can you help them that creates a
real sense for that person of being
known and cared about and seen by you
the boss
and i
and that is invaluable
then you become the kind of boss people
really like
because you care about them
i want to go back to the social brain um
which was one of the most interesting
concepts from your book and it's
something that i've seen other people
sort of touch on
um i forget the the name of like
the person who's basically a little more
dominant or higher in the dominance
hierarchy or whatever but like if you
put women together in uh they live
together let's say that they're um
periods their menstrual cycles will sync
up but it will cue off of the woman
who's considered to have the most
high social standing
how many different things
happen like that so women's periods um
posture facial expressions like what are
what are the things that oh yeah it's
very powerful
so let me tell you a little bit about
the social brain then i'll talk about
the most powerful person in the group
uh the social brain was actually it's a
fairly new discovery social neuroscience
is a new field and it it
it emerged as the neuroscientists
stopped just looking at one brain and
one body and one person started looking
at two brains and two bodies while
people interact and they discovered lo
and behold there's all this circuitry in
the forebrain the front part of the
brain which is designed to link in to
the brain of the other person one of the
famous
discoveries was mirror neurons are you
familiar with that concept mirror
neurons i am yeah but please say say
something about it so that the audience
knows you know the there's a story i
don't know if it's neuromythology or
true but
neuro
mirror neurons were discovered in a lab
in italy when they're looking not at
two brains but one cell
in a monkey that only activated when the
monkey raised its arm
and one day the monkey's standing stuck
still
and that neuron is firing nobody knows
what's going on and then they realize
hot day in italy lab assistant went out
for gelato he's standing in front of the
monkey and every time he lifts the
gelato to take a lick the monkey's
neuron for the same movement activates
that was discovery of
mirror neurons pepper our brain and they
tell us instantly what the person in
front of us
is
feeling
doing intending
and it's a back channel for emotions to
pass and there are many other circuits
now discovered in the social brain
but
what it means is that
we are biological actors in the people
close to us
and if you're powerful if you're the
most powerful person in the group it's
human nature to pay most attention to
and put most importance on what the most
powerful person in the group says or
does so for example at yale school of
management they did a series of studies
where
the leader of a team is put in a bad
mood and people on the team catch that
mood performance goes down
leader is put in a very positive mood i
feel really good
people on the team catch that mood
performance goes up so it has real
consequence even though it's invisible
and we're biological actors in other
people's
physiology
what do you mean by that
say that another way
i'll tell you i'll tell you the study
that says this because it makes it
vividly
so there's so women are getting their
brains scanned one by one
and they're told they're going to get a
shock and electric shock in about 30
seconds
and their amygdala which we know is the
brain's radar threat goes nuts
and
they they go into the anxious state
firefly
if someone holds their hand
then they calm down a little bit if
their husband holds their hand they go
completely quiet the amygdala
goes quiet goes calm what this means is
that the people we love and the people
who love us
are connect to us connected to us
silently biologically you go to a
hospital in the day when you could go to
a hospital and visit a loved one
and you're just there with them your
presence is important biologically
and it may not be evident to us
but
it's it's clear
that this happens so uh you know the
most powerful person in the group
has a lot of influence that we just
don't know about we don't notice
man that's uh when i think about while
we're recording this we're still in the
middle of covid and um
people not being able to be there when
their loved ones are struggling
profoundly or even passing away i've
heard horror stories
about where people have had to stand
outside the hospital window
while somebody passed away on the inside
and that was heartbreaking before i
heard you say that
but the thought of how we basically are
regulating each other's
neurochemistry is even more terrifying
and it also speaks to why one of the
most profound tortures that you can
put on a human is just radical isolation
that's true unless they're a meditator
there's a difference between isolation
uh you know vivek murty who's uh just
been appointed the head of the just been
appointed by biden ahead of his covert
task force he was a surgeon general
under uh obama he wrote a book on
loneliness
and loneliness as you say is horrible
uh being isolated not being able to
connect with people it ups your the
likelihood of severe illness depression
anxiety
terrible however
if you're a meditator you think oh what
a great chance for a retreat
and that's called solitude
because what have they figured out like
are they just learning to regulate their
own physiology
well it it might just feel good
it's a way of putting yourself in a
positive state or at least engaging in a
meaningful pursuit
and this is really important because it
has to do with one's sense of purpose or
meaning
nietzsche said
if you have a why to live you can endure
almost any how
i heard that i read that line in a book
by viktor frankl who survived four years
in nazi concentration camps he said that
was his motto
because he realized that having a larger
sense of purpose
made it easier for him to endure the
actual tortures that he went through
and i i think that that's uh
that if we have a sense of meaning and
if you're involved say okay you're all
alone but you're a heavy-duty meditator
well that's great because i can pursue
this meaningful work
which is meditation there's i'll do a
retreat and i've heard this from friends
of mine who are uh
serious meditators that the lockdown is
as a double-edged sword on the one hand
they can't see their family or friends
on the other hand it's a great
opportunity for a retreat because no
one's going to bug you
and you know the classic
recipe for place to go on retreat is a
place of solitude where you don't have
to deal with everyday life
so here's a question for you do you
think that meditators would get the same
benefit from
meditation during isolation specifically
so as a as a
way to substitute for the fact that
they're now alone
if they didn't see it as being
purposeful so they were doing the act
they were focusing they were breathing
they were you know bringing their
attention back but they had no sense
that they were doing this for a grander
purpose it was just i was given this
instruction manual and i have to do it
and that's that would they still get the
benefit or is it the framing that this
is a purpose for me to give myself to so
so there's no data i know of that looks
at these two conditions which it's a
nice experiment you just outline however
i i have a hunch that the larger frame
of meaning makes a difference absolutely
and i think it does in every part of our
life for example at work
uh if you can find a purpose for example
i i just gave a talk by zoom to a group
of physicians or front line of covet
and we were talking about purpose and
meaning
you know they're putting their lives at
risk helping people their income is
suffering but they're doing it anyway
and they're they're worried about their
families bringing it home
on the other hand
the medical mission has such meaning and
gives them such purpose
that they do it anyway and i think if it
didn't have that meaning or purpose it
was just a matter of you know let's
weigh the risk and the money
they'd give up
but there's this underlying sense of you
know what i'm doing matters
that makes them keep going
so man search for meaning the victor
frankel book you were talking about
before when first of all it's on my list
of like the absolute must-reads that
people have got to read this book
but that really drove home for me so
you know one thing i get asked a lot
about is success how do you become
successful all that and when i look back
on
my own life um i it becomes very clear
to me that the punch line of life isn't
success money fame it's none of that
it's neurochemistry and the only thing
that matters is how you feel about
yourself when you're by yourself
and getting to a point where you have
what i'll call fulfillment
because it's not it's not as transient
as
happiness a bowl of ice cream makes me
happy but it's very transient and if i
repeat it too much then it stops being
you know something that feeds me but
when you focus on meaning and purpose
doing something that matters and
oftentimes doing something that matters
that is difficult
even increases its sense of importance
in you and gives you sort of this
outsized impact
um that to me is so fascinating i don't
know do you think about things from an
evolutionary lens because i'd be really
curious why the hell
meaning and purpose is so fundamental to
the well-being of the human psyche
i'm not sure i can connect
evolution to meaning and purpose
i know that
you know our beliefs about what we do
are extremely powerful
and presumably anything that's powerful
must have had some payoff in evolution
let me just parenthetically mention i
wrote the introduction to a new book by
victor franco called yes to life
by victor frankl how can it be he gave
three lectures
six months after he left the camp
that uh would have been rediscovered
wow it just translated
and i had the honor of writing the
introduction
so give me a little bit about what that
book was and then tell me what you wrote
in the introduction i'm literally
hanging on every word victor frankel is
is who i want to talk about a hero yeah
so victor frankel
the very title of the book gives me the
chills think about it yes to life in
spite of everything what he had just
gone through his what his pregnant wife
died in the camps
his parents his brother
i mean he it was dramatic terrible plus
he was tortured
and you know forced labor horrible
he had a deeper sense of meaning and
purpose which got up through
and um
in the book i in the introduction
i talk about a few things one of which
is why meaning matters so much and you
know he
dedicated his life
to helping people find a sense of
meaning but the yes to life in spite of
everything was actually a line
from a theme song
that was written
for a concentration camp
and the prisoners were forced to sing
the camp song at the end of an
exhausting day of labor
some of them sang it into the line yes
to life in spite of everything
sarcastically because of course they're
in a situation that was
hell
and
i talked to a woman i know whose parents
were survivors of one of those camps
and she said that every saturday they
get together with other survivors and
have a party
that was the yes to life in spite of
everything in the positive sense
and that was in the camps
no no after they got out she was going
to say
no no you couldn't have a party in a
camp yeah yeah but afterward because
they felt that life was so precious that
they had survived
and
uh the so the franco book i i recommend
i recommend both of those books
and they cover some of the same
territory and also different territory
what was your intro about what was sort
of the thrust oh well i had
several things one of the things i wrote
about was propaganda
disinformation very timely now
the the way the nazis got to power was
through telling lies beating them over
and over until they became truths in
people's minds and i
recommended
an outfit called the news literacy
project
which helps people particularly students
be
smart consumers of information like ask
you know who's saying this why are they
saying that do they want me to believe
something do they have other sources
they cite
uh you know is this based on
something i can trust or is it not
anyway i felt that that was really
important so i just picked up themes
from frankel's book
one thing that i found just
eye-opening in frankel's book is he
talks about that day where they're
liberated and he
recounts how there were people leaving
the camps that said
before nightfall i will have blood on my
hands meaning like i'm going right now
to kill somebody that was involved in
you know having locked us up and and he
just saw that as such a tragedy that
they were walking away with the wrong
frame he certainly understood it
obviously um but he was like you're
basically locking yourself up again and
you tell an extraordinary story in
emotional intelligence about heaven and
hell um and if i remember right it was a
samurai
tell that story i think that it it's
really enlightening so the samurai goes
to a monk and he says uh
he he wants a teaching on you know
buddhism dharma
he says uh would you give me uh explain
to me the difference between heaven and
hell
and the monk looks at him says i
wouldn't waste my time with you you're
so stupid and that that the samurai gets
you you know just has a middle hijack
like that starts to draw his sword and
the monk says very calmly that's hell
and then the
samurai puts his sword back as he calms
down and the monk says that's heaven
it's in our mind
yeah i love that idea and this is
totally tangential but something i find
really powerful
i don't know how familiar you are with
jordan peterson but he has an
interpretation of the bible verse that
the meek shall inherit the earth and he
said he really struggled with that
concept for a long time why would
because we normally would translate meek
as um weak
and he said he just really struggled why
would the weak who will be trampled upon
by the strong over and over and over why
would they ever inherit the earth and he
said if you go back and i forget which
language but if you go back into the the
ancient version of the language from
which that word was taken
meat could be interpreted to mean the
person with the sword who keeps it
sheathed and that you are capable of
great violence but you keep it in
control and it's the people who are
capable of the violence but have the
emotional control to stay calm
that ultimately win in fact there's
another story in your book that's so
perfect to this um the the
japanese subway story about the guy that
comes on drunk and the aikido guy that
goes to step in i'd love to hear that as
well so i i had this friend late friend
now terry dobson who's one of the first
people
to bring aikido to the west
terry had been a marine he's like a
tough guy used to be his favorite uh
thing to you know a favorite activity
was he'd go to a bar and get really
drunk and get in a fight that was a good
time for derek and then he found himself
studying with this aikido master
who said in essentially what you're
saying tom you have to keep your sword
seized
learn how to take down anyone any time
and don't do it then you win
so
terry's on the subway in tokyo very
crowded they're very really packed
and
he sees this big strong dirty
tough
drunk guy at one end of the subway and
he's kind of stumbling down the car and
people parting
ways
and uh
terry
says okay well this is justified i'm
going to take this guy out so it gets
ready you know it's like high noon on
the subway car there's terry at one end
of the drunk at the other and as the
drunk is stumbling toward terry this all
japanese guy in a traditional kimono
pipes up and says to the trunk hey how
are you doing what you've been doing and
the drunk looks at him says
what do you care
and the
old guy just keeps going he says hey
come on sit down next to me tell me
about your life
and the drunk
slumps down in the seat and says oh well
you know
i don't got no job i don't got no wife i
don't got no house i feel terrible
and the
old guy starts patting him and then
terry realizes he doesn't have anything
to do
the trouble's over
and that was a story about keeping your
sword seized tom i have a question for
you yes and it's about purpose
i i've seen some research that suggests
that the old style like brand me it's
all about me and my success
is actually only held by a very small
majority of people
and that there's a different brand of
success
which has to do with finding a larger
meaning
and i'm curious about how you got into
what you are doing now because from one
point of view it's very successful but
from another point of view i i see you
as helping many many people i wonder
what what's been your motivation could
you tell me about your path yeah so
i chased money really hard for a very
long time in my early 20s from the time
i was a little kid i knew that i wanted
to be rich
and um i just went after it and i woke
up every day valuing myself for my
ability to suffer in pursuit of my goal
which was money
and i did that for almost a decade and
finally my wife pulled me aside and was
like you're so unhappy it's now damaging
the marriage and i would drive into work
and it was like a cloud had rolled in i
just everything about my life was misery
and the only thing that kept me going
was an obsession with getting rich and
the sense that i could endure more pain
than the next person
and there was something in my wife
saying that that because my highest
value is my marriage so when she said
that i was damaging the marriage it just
forced me to reflect on everything so i
realized at that point that i was worth
more i was worth about two million
dollars at the time
and i was worth more than i'd ever been
worth in my entire life and i was also
more unhappy than i'd ever been in my
entire life and so i have this moment of
you've got to be kidding i am living the
cliche of money camp by happiness i'm
like if there is ever something that
people have repeated over and over and
over it is that money cannot buy
happiness so why did i have to like walk
into this trap now that's a very
complicated answer i'll shorthand it to
money actually is very powerful and so
people will pursue it forever
okay cool so i could understand why
money not only had a lure to me but that
it would remain alluring not only to me
but to other people but that there was
a punchline that was bigger than that
and at the time the way i conceived of
it was i wanted to feel alive so going
back to that gamma state that you were
talking about
i got that gamma state from writing and
when you you even referred to it in the
book as the moment where you you just
realized how to solve a difficult
problem that half second of just pure
joy and i was like i want to live there
and i would get that literally have the
chills again i would get that sometimes
writing so and i had originally started
pursuing money because i wanted to build
a studio
none of that really matters but so
i realized okay i wouldn't have said
gamma state i wouldn't have known that
quite honestly until i read your book
but i wanted that moment of feeling
alive so i decide that i'm gonna stop
chasing money and that i'm never gonna
chase money again and i'm gonna chase
that feeling now irony of ironies
i then found a company with my partners
that we said okay we're not going to
pursue money anymore this is going to be
about adding value to people now we're
not dumb by this point we're quite
business savvy but we're like we're
gonna leverage the business savvy to
construct something that allows us not
to focus on money but to focus on
lifting other people up like making a
product that people want that it makes
our life better and i start tapping into
meaning and purpose and so i'm reading
about the brain voraciously by this
point for like 10 or more years so i'm
beginning to understand some of the
basics of psychology and like
neurochemistry and you know i haven't
read viktor frankl yet at this point but
i'm sort of beginning to understand that
there are different brain states and
things you can lean on so i'm like okay
meaning and purpose i'd read a book
called drive by daniel pinker i think
and he talks about how meaning and
purpose are
two of these five fundamental drivers
and so i'm like okay that's really
interesting i'm gonna lean heavily on
that and that company ends up being a
billion dollar company and ends up
changing my life i mean just like you
can't even imagine all from pursuing
meaning and purpose
and not from pursuing money
but in that process i had about 3 000
employees and a thousand of them grew up
in the inner cities which you also talk
about in your book you're beginning to
understand why i resonate so much with
you
and
i realized as you have seen from the
data that growing up in the inner cities
is devastating psychologically and that
more than anything this is a
psychological problem like the toll that
it takes on somebody's psychology and so
i'm like okay i've had all this sort of
worldly success that i've wanted i i
have long ago learned that it's not
about the money anyway that this is
about meaning and purpose because i have
been wealthy and just emotionally
bankrupt and i never want to go back
there so
can i teach this and so my obsession
becomes
i had to do certain things to my mind to
get primed for success
and
i wasn't the person voted most likely to
succeed
again you talk about this when you talk
about eq and iq so my iq i would say is
pretty average but i
did the work to come to understand
myself which then gave me the ability to
understand other people
and that has paid dividends in all the
ways that you outline in your book and
being able to be a good leader and all
of that
so how much of this can i package and
teach and so that was the birth of this
show was me trying to create something
for my employees because i was like look
i'm going to bring because you become
sort of like the father figure in a
company and people are going to ignore
their boss the way they ignore their
father and so i was like they need to
hear this from other people so i said
watch i will bring on i mean at this
point hundreds of people and they're all
going to circle around very similar
ideas because they're just our universal
principles to success there is
universal things to think meditation
works as close to universally as you're
going to find and so it's no accident
that the number of people that i bring
on talk about these very similar
concepts
and so like you with wanting to bring
meditation is
there's meaning and purpose in it for
you it's a kind thing to do it makes you
feel good about yourself
that's why i do what i do this it really
is teachable it really does change
people's lives and it really impacts my
neurochemistry through the avenues of
meaning and significance and purpose
that's really fascinating tom thanks for
that that's coming for sure there are a
couple of things
one is i'm very intrigued by
your fascination with brain chemistry
uh and the other is
that i wonder if
people looking at you
and your life arc and trajectory
might confabulate meaning and purpose
with financial success
because there are many people who are
very satisfied because their life is
meaningful and purposeful
who aren't financially successful
they're successful
by other criteria
so those are just two two questions i'm
asking you well on the on the second one
um
the
worry that i have i would be a little
surprised that people um confabulated
my message with um money and meaning and
purpose because i go out of my way to
make it very clear like how many
billionaires have to commit suicide
before you realize money is not going to
solve those problems
it is possible though though but that's
part of why i don't sell lifestyle so
you won't see me um
you know doing drone shots of my house
or you know sitting in front of a
ferrari i don't even own for ours i
couldn't give a but like that
whole thing i don't get into even though
it actually be great for business
now on the the thing that i do worry
about is that people will because i'm
all about being hardcore i'm all about
working
really hard and i get so turned on by
people that talk about working hard
working long hours that is my
aphrodisiac i love being around people
who are like that i love doing it but
there's one caveat in that which is the
the thing that i'm chasing that i go
after every day gives me that gamma
feeling and so it makes me feel alive so
i'm working on the weekends because i'm
getting i mean look i may only get three
or four of them throughout the day but
i'm getting those moments of like the
pure joy of having solved a problem that
i care about with a skill set that i've
worked really hard to obtain and i think
that the thing that i'm creating helps
other people
so it's like this perfect neurochemical
cocktail and i don't have kids so for me
leaning into the work is
joyful
it creates something i care about and
it's in a realm where i'm doing things i
would do whether i got paid for them or
not so i do and i try to tell people
look be careful who you take advice from
me included if what you want is a
stress-free life i'm not your guy if you
want to be the greatest parent ever i'm
not your guy these are not the things
that i know how to do nor are they the
things that i'm pursuing and so i do
actually worry about that because some
people
will
many people
would hate the life that i live and so
they need to be very careful not to try
to follow in my footsteps
so you you get a high from working hard
is what you're saying i very much get a
high now the complexities of that in
terms of value system and beliefs which
you mentioned earlier i have hand
crafted those things on purpose to
exaggerate the high that i get
do you feel you have enough time for
your private life
non-work life you know it's interesting
so i have so melded them my wife and i
founded the company together so for the
last in fact the last two companies she
was a part of the founding team of quest
and and now we are legitimate
co-founders of impact theory um so we
work side by side um and that is really
fun we have complementary skill sets i
do worry sometimes though that god
forbid something happened to my wife
uh
we've been together now for 20 years i
definitely do not fear divorce but i
really fear her dying or you know
something happening
because i don't spend a lot of time
investing in friendships
so
that that's one where i'm like oh is
this the right play so i try to have
enough of a foot in that world that i'm
not like completely isolated beyond my
wife um but that is like if i were to
say
your lifestyle has one weakness
it's that i make so much time for my
wife and so much time for my passions
that doesn't leave a lot
for traditional friendship maintenance
and do you miss it
not usually which is why it's like one
of those were
intellectually i know man if something
happened to her i would that would not
be a pleasant place to be because
even though i'm introverted so i have i
like a meditator who just does not have
a problem being alone i do not have a
problem being alone but i i'm not a
you know industrial strength meditator
so i know a problem would come for me
well i don't know if you remember the
part of emotional intelligence where i
talk about long-term
marriages
and how for the audience each mate
becomes part of the biology
the
the way in which you handle your inner
feelings and
physiology of each other and so a
divorce or a death of a mate as you say
is devastating because you're losing
you're literally losing part of yourself
too in addition to your attachment to
the person
so i can totally understand what you're
saying and i also think tom that
what you have found and what you have
crafted for yourself
i i suspect is unique to you
that i i don't think one size fits all
that other people
and people who love your podcast which
is great which is helpful
may have other
ways of finding the perfect set for some
people it will be friendships
you know or
or some purpose that doesn't bring a lot
of money
and for others
they'll want to be you
essentially yeah there's definitely no
question that one size does not fit all
do
do you think about like how people can
find
for them what's going to be the right
answer because i find so many people are
living by the law of accident their
parents made a comment when they were a
kid and that steered them in one
direction a girlfriend broke up with
them and made a comment and that you
know solidified them down a path or
they've got golden handcuffs the job
just pays so well
um how do you
help people with that yeah i think it's
an interaction
of life's accidents which put us in on
one path or another or switch can't
control that
and self-awareness
which as i said is pivotal part of
emotional intelligence because your
self-awareness
at a deeper level
helps you find your inner rudder your
your own sense of what matters to me
which is meaning how do you do that
yeah i think you do it by assessing
choices you've made
or are making
um
i'll tell you looking for things that
lead you to certain emotional states
some people may be doing that
but you know
the the paradox of purpose is that you
can endure unpleasant emotional
situations
because it has meaning for you
so it may not you may not be chasing
highs
you may be chasing a deeper satisfaction
or a deeper contentment so this friend
of mine i grew up in the central valley
of california
and uh he grew up on a ranch in the next
town
and he almost flunked out of high school
he went to a community college he found
he took a film course and found that he
loved film
and
he got into a film school
he made a student film that caught the
eye of a director who gave him a job as
a production assistant you know where
i'm going because you've read the book
but uh
this
director was so impressed by him
that he talked a studio into backing a
film based on a script this guy had
written and letting him direct it
and everybody thought he'd do terribly
but he did very very well he made a lot
of money from that film
but he
the studio had
the last cut
this is traditional in hollywood they
paid for it they're going to edit it the
way they want it he hated the way they
had it and he decided you know i'm a
creative artist i'm never going to let a
studio do this again so he went off on
his own founded his own company
and made another movie based on a script
he'd written
almost uh
failed because he ran out of money
caught a last minute loan
but you've probably seen the movie
because i'm talking about star wars
so george lucas is a guy who knew what
mattered to him he made a decision
accident
that turned out to be hugely successful
financially but that wasn't why he made
it he made it because he felt his
creative integrity was at stake
so
this is the interaction between purpose
and success in a in a conventional sense
of the world
you may get it
what do you know lucas
he is so first of all that story is so
good like every filmmaker is
uh if they're paying attention is in
love with that story um and obviously
how well it worked out for him i had the
a very weird expo i went to usc film
school and while i was there yeah so
while i was there lucas obviously is
one of their biggest if not the biggest
um
uh donors and so he was there one time
and i just saw a bunch of people
standing outside the the editing room
and there was this big
big guy just like a real big physical
presence he's chomping on a cigar and
he's telling this great story and so i
just stop and i'm listening and as he's
telling the story i'm like
he's talking about star wars
and then i'm like but i've never seen
this guy before in my life and i know
who george lucas is and i'm like huh
that's interesting and then i look to my
side i'm not joking
seven feet from me george lucas is
standing very quietly up against the
post and this guy you know the big sort
of gregarious i don't even remember who
he was he he i don't know if he was one
of
lucas's
producers or if he worked at lucasfilm i
don't know but um it was so interesting
to see
lucas letting somebody else shine you
talk about great leaders getting the
best out of other people you know
letting this guy shine letting him fill
the room um and lucas just sort of you
know sitting back very quietly smiling
as this guy told the story i always
found that so fascinating because
you know obviously lucas is
i mean famous and you want to talk about
in a film school that bears his name it
was literally if i remember right called
the lucas uh
cntv school
and it was like
here he is just so quiet so chill
doesn't need the spotlight just really
content
that left a big impression on me in
terms of not always needing to be the
center of attention which at that point
in my life was pretty important to me
and now is despite the fact that i have
a youtube show is actually not something
that i think a lot about um that was
pretty powerful how did you get to know
him
as i said we're both from the central
valley my high school used to play his
high school
and we met some years later through uh
one of his girlfriends at the time
and had dinner and we just hit it off
because we came from the same village
essentially and we're both refugees from
the same horrible it's like
the empty part of california
and uh
around modesto
he grew up in modesto i grew up in
stockton i was at the new york times
when i met him and he was george lucas
by then
but he was george lucas by accident he
was always kind of uh
unassuming
you know
it didn't matter to him that people
recognized him or didn't
you know or gathered around here but he
said he'd rather let the guy chomping
his cigar be the center of attention
one thing that i find interesting is so
obviously his early films which you
alluded to were very avant-garde thx
1138 is
i will say his student film which i
watched made me want to give up because
it was so
good i was absolutely startled that that
was a student's film um thx 1138 the
feature film i was a little less
enamored by and it obviously did not do
well at the box often if i remember
right it basically bankrupt zoetrope
which was francis ford coppola's company
who was the guy that you know really
took a shine to him and and sort of
brought him into the the professional
world
um
but
he had to make a choice do i want to
keep being this avant-garde sort of
indie filmmaker that i always thought it
would be or do i you know tell more
conventional stories but he had this one
story he really wanted to tell which is
american graffiti
which you know oftentimes people don't
realize that's what set him up to to get
the kind of ownership in star wars that
he had because it crushed it did over a
hundred million if i'm not mistaken
american graffiti back in the day um
which was you know just astronomical
one of the innovations in american
graffiti was the soundtrack i don't know
if you're a film student you may have
noticed but everything has a song to it
every scene
uh which which had never happened in the
film before
but there was something about that that
just showed his creativity but there's
something uh about that that people
loved and that gave him the cushion
to risk his own money which people in
hollywood said is insane you don't risk
your own money on a film you get
investors he didn't do it yeah
i think he it turned out okay yeah he
was lucky what's interesting about
american graffiti in george lucas's own
words he said that was an ode to a trend
that he saw going away and he wanted to
make this swan song to kids having sex
in cars and i thought wow that's so
interesting
the way that like the world does move on
because by the time i came around that
was i mean certainly not anything that i
did or any of my friends that i knew did
um it had you know sort of become passe
and
now when i think about trends as they
intersect with like what you're doing
and how much technology is changing kids
and social media and you talk in the
book about you know what's the sort of
impact that this is having on people's
brains
um do you
fear at all where we're headed because
of our sort of shortening attention span
is that a myth or is it actually going
to have some negative consequences i
would say it's not just attention span
and it's open question whether it really
is shortening
uh
but it's the development of the
emotional social circuitry itself
uh particularly exacerbated now because
kids aren't even in school nobody knows
what the consequence will be
for today's kids
of having just be home alone for a year
or more because of the virus
and to not even go to school but to have
it at a distance and my grandkids are
you know in school but it's online
and
this is on the one hand
uh getting them used even more used to a
digital and technological world and on
the other hand we don't even know what
the consequence will be for the
developing brains and it's going to be
different for a five-year-old than a 10
year old and a 15 year old because
brains develop different parts of
different rates
i
actually see it as an argument for being
sure kids get social and emotional
learning
because i suspect they're being deprived
systematically
of the kinds of interactions the kids
in evolution
and in your childhood and mind had with
other kids and with people their
families and teachers and so on that
helped their brains develop
i would say well for social interaction
and for managing themselves
so i i feel uh
that
this means we have to be even better at
giving kids access
to this kind of thing let me tell you
mentioned inner city kids
one of the things that social emotional
learning does is it really can help
level the playing field in this way
i i've been mentioning cognitive control
which is the ability to manage your
disruptive emotions
lots of people get in trouble
particularly in inner cities because
they're too impulsive they don't manage
their emotions well or their impulsivity
if there was a study done in new zealand
that showed if you have high cognitive
control between four and eight in your
30s you have better health and more
financial success
and if you develop cognitive control
between four and eight you get the same
benefits and this is the kicker
cognitive control is a stronger
predictor of your
adult life than your childhood iq or the
wealth of the family you grew up in
that's the great leveler
so i feel if we give kids a complete
skill set
we're going to be doing them a great
service for the rest of their life
one of the skills because
getting to like real sort of measurable
or tangible skill set is one of my
obsessions in the book you talk about i
forget what you call it but you've got
the kid who's about to play soccer and
the sort of bully kid comes up tonight
yeah you think you're gonna play soccer
um
one if you could tell that story and put
a name to that technique because it was
such a powerful example of a kid who
learned something deployed it and you
can sort of extrapolate that into his
future life and guess why this is so
powerful
so tom put yourself in a middle school
in the inner city of new haven which is
a bomb down there's no jobs in not even
for
people that used to there used to be 20
or 30 000 factory workers and maybe now
they're none
the local heroes are the drug dealers on
the corner because they're successful
and
it's a middle school
and as you say the scene is there's this
one kid who's really kind of overweight
and
definitely not athletic and two kids
behind him that are what we call jocks
very athletic
the two jocks are making fun of this kid
and one of them says very sarcastically
oh
so you think you're gonna play soccer
and the
a kid
overweight kid turns around
takes a deep breath this could easily
lead to a fight so it's like he's steady
not getting himself ready
takes a deep breath and he says to that
kid
yeah i'm gonna play soccer but i'm not
nearly as good as you are what i'm good
at is art show me anything i'll draw it
really well
someday i hope to be as good as you are
at soccer and at that
the first kid who's just putting him
down comes over puts his arm around him
says oh come on i'll show you a thing or
two so the technique is a put up
when someone puts you down you say
something positive about yourself
something positive about the other
person changes the chemistry of the
moment and he learned this in social
emotional learning they call it social
development in that school system
so
you know kids love these classes because
it's about their life
you know how i can handle my own upsets
and how i can get along with other kids
this is what kids care about is
you know themselves and other kids
so
it's a a real win-win
do you know what's the psychology why
are kids so ruthless is it like innate
jockeying for position like in my adult
life i would never say something like oh
so you think you're gonna do xyz thing
that i'm good at like that seems so
insane to me and we certainly
teach kids hopefully most adults know
not to do things like that but kids are
not for play like they will
just thrash people
so tom think about it i think we
socialize kids into that attitude
uh into the bullying or to not bullying
well it's it's an extension of something
that we do which it's an unintended
consequence i believe
you know your k you don't have kids but
remember when you're a kid you come home
from school
and the parent asked the kid how did you
do on the test
what if the parent instead said who was
kind to you today
it's a completely different frame of
mind about what matters at school
but we
in our culture and by the way our
culture was an outlier
ours in australia among world cultures
in rampant individualism
we want our kids to be better than other
kids
and a kid who's developing
prefrontal control
over the amygdala
and it
for boys particularly it doesn't take
place till the 20s adolescents
no it's just not there
so
whatever their impulse is they express
it
and so
you end up with bullies
of course there's individual differences
some kids have it earlier they command
themselves better we could teach
cognitive control
it's a very teachable skill the brain
wants to learn it but we don't
empathy teachable
it's all teachable of course empathy how
how do you teach empathy so the thing
about empathy
is that almost never in life do we get
feedback
for example
you may have a hunch how someone feels
you don't ever test it out you don't say
uh do you feel angry or do you feel
happy or do you feel sad
but if you do that then you get then the
part of the brain that empathizes gets
information there's an amazing 45-minute
instruction
in reading emotions from facial
expression of paul ekman pollickman is
one of the world's expert on the facial
expression of emotion
paul ekman has a website and
in 45 minutes you can learn to detect
what he calls micro expressions which
are fleeting parts of an emotional
expression
that tell us how someone really feels
not how they want us to think they feel
and beating micro expressions uh is is a
form of empathy it's part of empathy it
can be taught
yeah that that's interesting because you
know when i think about even when i was
a kid the the thought of bullying
somebody no way like i was just too
aware of how much that sucked
now there were other things i was
completely oblivious to like i had no
sense of how i was coming across other
people um but
that one being able to project myself
into somebody else's shoes
that one i could do now that makes me
think about sort of what traits are
predictive of success and one thing you
mentioned earlier briefly um and you
talk about the book and i took a note
because i was like how is this true that
optimism is
highly correlated with success
how like what what's the stat how
correlated with success is it and
why
okay well let me talk about optimism the
drive to achieve
and emotional management
because i think you need all of them for
success and then
remind me to talk about what's wrong
with them if that's all you got
and it has to do with empathy
so
that uh when i was in graduate school i
had a professor named david mcclellan
who studied entrepreneurs successful
entrepreneurs and he realized
that they
had several
competencies he called that you didn't
find in unsuccessful entrepreneurs one
of them
was that they loved performance feedback
they wanted a metric for how they're
doing so they could improve
they had a learning curve for how
they're
acting
another was that they took risks that
looked foolish to other people but they
felt were smart and they felt it was
smart because they had done their
homework
they knew they had some sense that this
can work
and other people who hadn't
gathered at information didn't think so
so the drive to achieve which is
sometimes these days called grit
meaning you keep your eye on the goal
one of the interesting things you talk
about the high you get
it turns out if someone has a goal in
mind and pictures in their mind how
they're going to feel when they achieve
that goal it activates circuitry in the
left prefrontal cortex that makes you
feel good
so if you can keep that in mind
it doesn't matter what obstacles you
have you're just going to keep going
because you know it's going to feel good
when you get there one way or another
and then there's uh the optimism
which is positive outlook which is the
sense that i can do better
it's these days all called it's called
growth mindset
uh there's a positive outlook means that
even if i have a setback even if i fail
it's okay
because i know i can get better at it
and of course these days in silicon
valley having a failure is a market of
future success
because it's assumed you're gonna learn
from that and do better next time
and then all of that uh is based on
being able to manage yourself well
and being able to keep going despite
what happens to recover from being upset
and then
the deficit is something we've talked
about if you only care about your own
success you may end up very successful
but very unhappy and you've told the
story about that if you can think about
how you can help other people
empathy or compassion
then you may find a deeper sense of
meaning
that will give you a trajectory in life
that may give you a deeper satisfaction
which is not momentary happiness
but it's more lasting yeah getting
people focused on the right things is um
man it's it's really sort of top of the
list when i step back and i i so going
back to people that grew up in the inner
city
and i think about okay i've got you know
some very brief window of time where i
can try to instill in them the thing
that's going to allow them to go on and
be successful one is optimism or i have
always used the words growth mindset so
getting them to adopt a growth mindset
to believe that they can get better you
know through practice
it's what i call the only belief that
matters
because your actions are going to line
up with your beliefs and if you believe
that your talent and intelligence are
fixed traits and that you're never going
to be able to get better and life is
just about making the most of what you
have
every time you realize you're not as
good as you thought you were your world
is sort of shrinking shrinking shrinking
and that's certainly what happened to me
in my early 20s was the darkest period
of my life because i had a fixed mindset
and every time i failed at something i
was like oh my god i'm not as good as i
thought it was i'm not as good as i
thought i was not as good not as good
and so my world just kept getting
smaller i kept putting myself in smaller
rooms with you know less talented people
and that was sort of leading me nowhere
fast and the big breakout moment was
brain plasticity and i read about it
this was back when it was still highly
contested and i was like look i'm just
going to choose to believe that this is
real because when i
think about it being real i feel
optimistic i feel hopeful i feel light
that sense of pressure that's crushing
me down goes away and so let me just try
to live in that moment and then because
i chose to believe that if i practice
something i would get better at it i
actually started getting better
now this is this is where life gets
tricky and why
when you bring up that individualism i'm
like i'm actually team individual now
within a context of understanding
fulfillment and that fulfillment
requires just innate it is innate in us
as a social species to want to help the
group so you need to plug in but
wanting to get good yourself and i think
that there's also an innate driver there
for us to want to translate our
potential into actual skill set
and by doing that now you've got people
that are actually capable in the real
world you get the moving up dominance or
that's a terrible way to say it of
competence hierarchies so that they're
able to move up and be better and if
they're also helping those around them
and being the kind of leader that you
described it gets very interesting so
i'm always trying to get people on that
track of like look you just have to
recognize one thing skills matter so
skills mean you can do something other
people can't do
and if that thing that you can do that
other people can't do is something
society values and it you know matters
in terms of meaning and purpose that's
going to be amazing and then you can
translate potential into actual skills
by working at it so now it's like if you
just give them if if they buy into
that idea
then doors begin to open now it takes
time it's not something that you're
going to do you're not going to be able
to translate potential into skills
overnight but you get on this path that
is very self-reinforcing
tom let me give you a framework for that
please
comes from howard gardner have you
talked to him
he's at harvard school of education
anyway howard and i went to graduate
school at the same time too
howard talks about
aligning what you're great at
your excellence
with what you love doing
what engages you
with your ethical sense
what matters to you he says if you align
those three things you have what he
calls good work
and the question is how much of my day
is spent
in what i could call good work what
could i do to enhance it what could i do
to make it all of what i do
and i you know when i hear your career
trajectory it sounds like you've done
that
that you know this has been a guiding
principle but i offer it to you because
you
impact a lot of people and i agree with
you it's so important to understand that
you can get better and if you do the
work
of improvement
but that's not all there is to it it's
also what do you love doing
what will satisfy you and why do you do
it the dalai lama put it in a different
way i heard a mask group
conference at mit
on systems
he said whenever you face a decision ask
yourself three questions
who benefits is it just you
or a group
just your group or everyone
is it only for now or for the future
because that opens up a whole other way
of thinking about the consequence the
impact
i mean talk about impact theory that's
the theory of impact
talk to me about loving kindness
um when you talk about that that's sort
of what that makes me think that that
sense of expansion and how it makes you
feel
so
loving kindness which is empathy and
compassion essentially
i can be nurtured
we know this there's work at the max
planck institute that shows that if you
do
a practice which is basically a circle
of caring
you uh think about the people and who've
helped you along in your life people who
you're grateful for and if they're still
alive you wish them silently that you
know you hope that they'll be happy and
healthy
have a fulfilled life and thrive and
then you wish that for yourself
silently than the people you love
and then people you know people you work
with or whoever your neighbors and then
to everyone everywhere it turns out if
you do that
it
creates a stronger connectivity in the
brain you like neuroscience i know
it creates a stronger
connectivity uh in the part of the brain
which has that
concern empathic concern the third kind
of empathy
so that is
a kind of an exercise in loving kindness
and the the good thing about loving
kindness is it means that you
cultivate an attitude that primes the
likelihood that you'll actually help
someone that you'll actually care that
you'll manifest that
how you what you say or what you do
yeah that it's the neuroscience around
that and how
one thing i found in my life that is
it was really sort of startling when i
first discovered it it's one of the
secrets to my marriage
is how quickly you can actually shift
your own neurochemistry that you can be
angry you can be upset and and
maybe you're even angry and upset over
something that has justification like
some that person really has done you
wrong in a way that everybody would look
at and say yes they were wrong
and i just found that investing and
being angry and being right and you know
doubling down on the fact that i've been
wronged just didn't make me feel the way
that i wanted to feel and it certainly
didn't do anything wonderful to my wife
or to the marriage and so finding a way
to
to what i will sort of cheesily refer to
as filling my heart with love when i
fill my heart with love and i feel it
and it can be by laughing out loud it
can be just by thinking of a time where
my wife did something so kind for me
um
as you get better at least it has been
my experience that i just sort of know
how to put myself in that space which
i've never stopped to sort of think
about what exactly i'm doing in those
more vague moments but um i can move
myself to
uh that
place where i feel like my heart is full
of love and i'm like
even if this doesn't do anything for my
wife in this case i feel so much better
like i would rather be here from my own
sake but you know you talked about
emotions being contagious it also then
feels better for my wife
so
that brings to mind a lot of things one
is that there's a saying uh
tibetan saying the first person who
benefits from compassion is the one who
feels it
you're the beneficiary
why should you let your mind be
controlled by hell by anger
you know
and
actually the dialogue talks about the
difference between destructive anger and
constructive anger
destructive anger
is when it harms you or someone else
constructive anger is when you see an
injustice
or you know something that you really
do want to change
and you
keep your focus and you keep the energy
and you keep the persistence you let go
of the hatred
the disgust whatever the strong negative
emotion is and you keep going to to fix
things
also
you mentioned how quickly you recover
this is called resilience
the actual technical definition of
resilience in a lab is how long it takes
someone to shift from being upset you
can see it in the brain you can measure
physiology to getting back to what we
call baseline or calm
and people who are very good at recovery
have 30 times more activation in
circuitry in the left prefrontal cortex
than people who are going to be worrying
about it or thinking about it receiving
about it
a week later or in the middle of the
night they don't have the left
prefrontal cortex too so the left
prefrontal cortex inhibits the amygdala
that that surge of the hijack the right
prefrontal cortex get take gets taken
over by the amygdala hijack so the left
prefrontal cortex does a lot of things
it's the part of the brain that
activates when we think about where
we're going and how good it will feel
it says no to
amygdala hijacks it's the key to
recovering quickly it can be trained and
strengthened in kids i'll tell you how
i was in an inner city in spanish harlem
seven-year-olds in the class
every day they have an exercise they
call belly buddies
they get their favorite stuffed animal
they lie down on a rug they put the
animal
on their belly and they watch it rise on
the in-breath fall in the out that's
rising
if their mind wanders off they bring it
back basically it's mindfulness for
seven-year-olds but the data shows that
this kind of exercise strengthens the
circuitry in the brain that lets you
recover from being upset and why not
teach the kids from the get-go you know
why do you have to wait till you're 30
something but you have no question
let me ask you
when we think about emotional
intelligence is there um
you talk about the book
some sex differences and while for sure
there is massive amounts of overlap
is there any meaningful differences
between how men and women grapple with
emotional intelligence
well you know on every test of emotional
intelligence there are many now
women on average score better than men
on average
largely because women
are socialized to think about and become
experts in a relationship and men are
not
you know you talk to boys about things
and how they work
and you talk to girls about
relationships and how you feel
and that continues through life and
women talk to each other about
relationships and tend not to do it so
much so that's just the the
socialization or is the socialization an
echo of something physiological
well it may be from evolutionary there
may be an evolutionary advantage to
having that arrangement
uh i think it's also cultural in
thailand for example it's not that way
but how does it continue
in thailand
uh men grow up being about as sensitive
and empathic as women
i'm told i don't know
for sure but i think it's both an
interaction between
some
genetic or evolutionary determination
and cultural
but this is really important
it
if you look at
differences between genders you're
talking about two largely overlapping
bell curves not to get too nerdy but
the differences are at the extremes and
what it means is that any guy might be
as empathic or return to relationships
as any woman
men tend to be better at self-confidence
and managing upsetting emotions but any
woman can be as good as any guy if that
that's what it means you're talking
averages
and
very interesting if you look at top
performers
this is a study done in the business
setting
the gender differences fall away
the highly effective leaders if they've
been
are as attuned to relationships
as women
and the highly effective
leaders who are women are as good at
managing their emotions or as confident
as men
so i think that one thing people learn
as they go up the ladder
is how to have a fuller set of emotional
intelligence abilities
i think that sums up pretty well
the very powerful work that you've done
not just in the book emotional
intelligence which i cannot recommend
enough but the major swath of your body
of work where can people connect with
you what's the best way to learn more
from you well you can reach me through
my website
i recommend
the 25th anniversary edition of
emotional intelligence has an updated
intro by me
it will be out in december 2020
and available thereafter
and i have a newsletter on linkedin
which is free to anyone who wants to
subscribe
my latest thinking
and then yeah the
daniel goldman one word dot info is my
website just shoot me an email at
contact daniel gomez and phil and tom
it's a real pleasure talking to you
thank you man i feel the same your books
are amazing they've really shaped the
way that i think about emotional
intelligence and
meditation and its impact and i just i
can't recommend you or your work enough
so thank you for continuing to do it man
i was awesome to have it on the show if
you've got something in the future let
me know um i am all about having you
back on this was a lot of fun
awesome oh by the way i'm starting a
podcast
i'm starting a podcast as you should
i forgot it's called first person plural
uh and i think it's exciting title why
first person plural that's we first
person plural is we it's about us
and it's about my interests emotional
intelligence and beyond so those are all
ways to connect with me and
it's been wonderful connecting with you
thanks so much thank you guys be sure to
check out the new podcast definitely
read the books they are amazing and
speaking of amazing things if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
you